---
published: true
---


```
# Fuzzy inference systems for Environmental Modeling

![](https://cdn-images-1.medium.com/max/1600/1*qOAYkk1l738azCqotRbYTg.jpeg)

*Nature is not as organized as she seems, answers we so dearly seek from her are
imprecise and uncertain with a touch of complexity.*

*****

The late [L.A. Zadeh](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lotfi_A._Zadeh) was one of
the most innovative minds to have walked the planet. He is chiefly known for his
work in [fuzzy logic](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fuzzy_logic) which got him
the recognition that will echo through the academic and industrial world for
decades to come. Furthermore, he had the cool of a
[shinobi](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ninja) weilding shurikens under his
sleeve:

#### Crisp Boolean Knowledge

Think of a world where all questions are answered by the use of yes/no responses
and everyone talks using precise yet complex language. For instance, instead of
shouting “*duck*!”, your bodyguard tells you the precise speed, direction and
even quantum state of the bullet heading your way. Obviously in the end she’d
have to save some of this information for the eulogy period of your funeral.

Our minds are not engineered as electron microscopes to precisely understand the
world we inhabit clearly. But we still need to perceive our external environment
despite this deficiency considering the threats we pose to it. Aha! If that’s
the case then why don’t we delegate this to our lifeless counterparts with
extreme calculation powers?:

#### Soft and Fuzzy Computing (get it?)

[A fuzzy inference system](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fuzzy_control_system)
(FIS) is an AI research and soft computing method that uses [fuzzy
sets](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fuzzy_set). It seeks to simulate an expert
mind and distill complex information into a comprehensible statement that
accentuates the [degree](https://www.smbc-comics.com/comic/i-object) of
something by the use of membership functions and grades. *Fuzzy inference
systems* take advantage of uncertainty and imprecision to communicate complex
data without loosing a significant amount of information. The design of a
conventional FIS incorporates crisp input variables, an FIS engine which
*fuzzifies* the data and *deffuzziffied* output(s) (cute and fuzzy, boys).

This, however trivial it may seem, has numerous applications in fuzzy control
and feedback systems like robotics, industrial, office and even home automation.
These amazing applications transcend the borders of engineering as they go as
far as the earth sciences and fields like ecological modeling but first:

#### *The
E*[xpert](https://medium.com/incerto/surgeons-should-notlook-like-surgeons-23b0e2cf6d52)*
We know and Hate*

He walks into the room wearing a lab coat to tell you the state of air or water
quality in your area. He uses fancy terms like *p-value, eigenvalues,*
*principal components* and *lethal dose* to mask his cosmetic understanding of
the subject. But as a possibly affected party all you really want to know is
just whether the air/water is *good, bad, very bad or excellent*. All you want
is a bird’s-eye view without the clutter of multiple parameters or indicators
data and let alone his unnatural accent.

It is when we need to grade things by a *spectrum* or *continuum* that fuzzy
inference systems manifest their essence as a means of achieving conceivable
answers from complex reality. PS:* Don’t let sociologists get their hands on
fuzzy inference systems:*

#### Still Trivial?

Assuming fuzzy inference systems are a mere mathematical and artificial
intelligence tinkering is still possible at this point. Regardless, take a
second or two to think of something written about a lot by [Sarah
Cy](https://medium.com/@sarahcy), a mental illness that eats up most of our
population leading to secondary compounding effects on their health:
*depression*. Fuzzy inference systems are used to diagnose depression during its
early stages by integrating doctors observations of different symptoms to find
the *degree* of intensity of the mental ailment. Fuzzy inference systems are
actually used in a lot of medical and public health related applications.

Intelligent buildings air quality and conditioning systems can also use fuzzy
inference and control systems. Other applications that employ the use fuzzy
inference systems include water quality indexing, environmental valuation and
even the attractiveness of your spouse (*don’t tell her I gave you this idea*).
Now for my favorite part:

#### Why Fuzzy?

*When does a heap of sand become a non-heap if you incrementally remove a grain
of sand?* Just as it is with the spectrum of visible colors, it doesn’t benefit
much to make rigid boundaries of “black and white”extremes without considering
the impresice spectral beauty in between.

The [sorites paradox](https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sorites_paradox) brings
about interesting justification for fuzzy logic when handling ecological or
environmental data. It is this understanding that some things can only be easily
described by a spectrum that tells you that nature is not as organized as she
seems and answers we so dearly seek from her are imprecise and uncertain with a
touch of complexity.

#### Reversal of Perspective

Intuitive science for decision making is essential on many levels. The
assumption that scientific knowledge should be laden with complex equations and
tables inaccessible to the masses defeats the goal of the practice: rigor. Also
in the face of various issues affecting the modern socio-environmental realm
tools like fuzzy inference systems can ease fundamental decision making to
contribute to sustainable interactions with our immediate and distant
environments.

*****

#### Join the Nebulous movement

For more articles on fuzzy Ninjas. Join the Nebula Research Newsletter
[here](https://goo.gl/forms/eUYDqolh2CE3ut4U2).

```
