---
published: true
---
```
In Defense of Economic Valuation of the Environment

The stance taken by Arne Naess towards economic valuation of the environment
makes it look like the evil we should be fighting. It is our prejudices towards
our position and role[s] in an ecosystem we should seek to defeat.

*****

When I first came across deep ecology, I knew the philosophy was a godsend that
would give a different perspective to most of the outstanding environmental
issues whose consequences hang over humanity like a dark cloud seeking vengeance
for our human actions. To me it was the mental model that would lead to a
collective paradigm shift to a mindset characterized by eco-centric approach to
problems from one that was human centered and largely utilitarian.

Most of this remains true, and deep ecology is still relevant. This is
considering that the environment is a becoming greater pressing issue, it is
selfish to turn a blind eye to issues that affect the well-being of one’s grand
children and, it would make a cool hippy band name (°**Dee¶ Ecologi§t§**°).
However, it becomes a problem when proponents of deep ecology question the
economic valuation of the environment.

#### **Environmental valuation methods ain’t perfect.**

It is easy to dismiss assigning economic value to the environment and think of
it as a human centered act that gives humans leverage to define the worth of a
non human natural entity. It is similarly easy to assume the lack of rigor in
methods used by economists to value the environment as they are regarded more as
sorcerers than intellects

These views are justifiable and make intuitive sense to a degree. Consider for
instance one valuation method: the contingent valuation method. In a nutshell it
is a stated preference method that uses peoples responses to understand how much
they are willing to pay (WTP) for conservation or are willing to accept (WTA) as
compensation. Economic theory would have it that WTA=WTP but that doesn’t happen
on the ground. People are willing to accept more than they would pay for an
amenity in question. Maybe the discrepancy is a result of the endowment
principle or other biases who knows?

#### Put your money where you mouth is

It is however imperative to acknowledge that we do not make decisions in a
vacuum. Our decisions despite how self driven they may be affect the human and
non human environment around us. And aside our desire to mate and fill the
earth, our decisions are very much tied to money.

In a chapter of his book Skin in the game called merchandising virtue, the
prolific philosopher Nassim Nicholas Taleb makes a stance against calling out
systems one fully interacts with:

> It is immoral to be be in opposition to the market system and not live
> (somewhere in Vermont or Northwestern Afghanistan) in a hut or a cave isolated
from it

So unless you continue to live the Neolithic way, most of our decisions are
grounded on the man made concept of money and currency. A biochemist with
comprehension of the modern day capitalist economy would say money is the ATP
that fuels economies.

Now with that out of the way, it is easy to comprehend the mechanisms by which
we assign value to the things we interact with and how this value aids in our
decision making. For instance, the decision made by your distant cousin Omar to
sell his decent residential house for an automobile double the price would be
seen as irrational and infantile by most of your clan. This of course is despite
the fact that the car has more monetary value.

The school of thought that underlies valuation of the environment emphasizes the
need of assignment of economic value to the environment to inform cost benefit
analysis in the face of dilemmas that can potentially affect generations to
come. Despite the fact that most decisions that have to be made in relation to
the environment are a result of anthropogenic problems, it is worth noting that
some problems are natural and affect our economies as well. It is therefore
essential to integrate the economic value of the environment in
socio-environmental decisions.

#### Some deep ecology

Now the first principle of deep ecology suggests all nature has
intrinsic/inherent value that shouldn’t be defined by their utility to mankind.
This however, like Omar assumes economic valuation of the environment only deals
with monetary value assigned by a demand driven greedy society, it leaves out no
room for non-use value which itself is a valuation category that informs the
total economic value of an amenity.

With that in mind, we can see the essence of valuing our environment in a world
where informed decisions that affect future generations have to be made.
Choosing not to assign value to ecosystems gives them Zero monetary units making
them susceptible to decisions perilous to both human and non human environment.

> The stance taken by Arne Naess towards economic valuation of the environment
> makes it look like the evil we should be fighting. It’s our prejudices towards
our position and role[s] in an ecosystem we should seek to defeat.

#### Reversal of perspective

Some contemporary misconception of the motivation of valuation of the
environment also exists. Some look at valuation as a means of commodification of
the environment. This not only angers deep ecologists but it is derogatory and
happens not to be why the environment should be valued. The knowledge of the
value of an ecosystem is essential for sound decision making regardless of the
the utility the ecosystem brings. This is the reason for the integration of use
and non use value in the total economic value.

[Join the Nebula Research
Newsletter](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1ffnqOv80Ty8nQEr7t9iwOv94hgIhrxGODMZXnYndi_s/edit)
to get these essays straight in your mailbox.
```
