---
published: false
---
```
# The eyes in the sky: On satellite imagery as big data.

*We are in dire need of the bigger picture that satellite imagery might just
provide.*

*****

The arts and science have long propelled humanity to explore extremes of size
and scale. Advances in both realms have been in one way or the other influenced
by mankind’s interest in the extremely big and the infinitesimaly small. Think
calculus, microbiology, diatoms, telescopes nanotechnology and many other
examples in the sciences. The murals in st Peter’s cathedral, the extraordinary
lengths of Mozart’s pieces and even the scale of Leonardo da Vinci’s
illustrations and drawings being prominent examples in the arts. Size and scale
generally fascinate the human mind as their extremes are alien to our natural
perception. In an introduction to his article (which I recommend you read)
[Experiencing Scale Through
Science](https://meltingasphalt.com/experiencing-scale-through-science/)*. *The
essayist [Kevin Simler](https://medium.com/@kevinsimler) states the following:

> Without microscopes, telescopes, or computers, humans of the recent past had few
> ways to experience reality at scales much different from everyday life. Looking
up at the sky, out at the ocean, or across a canyon gave us an appreciation for
a few extra orders of magnitude. To go any further required the imagination.

> Today, thanks to technology and science, we have the tools to understand reality
> at mind-altering scales. **We can now think about time and space at dimensions
that would have been literally inconceivable to people just a few generations
earlier.**

One peculiar leap in science is the use of satellite imagery as a readily
available data source. Among other reasons, this peculiarity stems from the fact
that the use of satellite imagery is on both ends of the big and small spectrum:

#### Floating over shoulders of giants to see further with greater detail than
before.

I’ve always been inspired by Isaac Newton’s maxim on dependence on previous work
to further our advancement:

> To see far, I have had to stand on the shoulders of giants

Cool story Isaac. But see, remote sensing and satellite imagery offer a
different perspective of advancement, one whose significance is not limited by
borders of discipline.

#### An alternative perspective

The essence of satellite imagery as big data can be seen in the paradigm shift
in how we view the world. Think of how we have viewed metrics for measuring
economic advancement. Most have trust for economic models whose methods are used
even where inappropriate. But with remote sensing (including use of satellites
UAVs etc) we can obtain fairly insightful information on the state of our
economy from images of our night lights.

Now you may want to say “okay now that’s just ridiculous dude, what do pictures
of our electrified houses tell us about our economy, don’t we need complex
graphs and equations to understand such”? Personally I don’t think so:

A more sound response to this can however be found in a book called *everybody
lies* by *Seth Stephens-Davidowitz* where he writes:

> Why might night light be a good measure of GDP? Well in very poor parts of the
> world, people struggle to pay for electricity. And as a result, when economic
conditions are bad, households and villages will dramatically reduce the amount
of light they allow themselves at night.

Night light changes documented by remote sensed satellite imagery correlate with
economic fluctuations in many developing areas of the globe a correlation that
obviously implies causation.

The use of satellite imagery also comes relevant in environmental modeling and
monitoring. Negative difference spectral indices like NDVI, NDBI and NDWI offer
data that give us numerous perspectives of the state of our immediate
vegetative, built and open water environments respectively.

* Negative difference vegetation index is relevant for forest monitoring,
determining crop water stress, wetland health, river catchment management and
even drought monitoring
* Negative difference built index on the other hand can inform the rate of
urbanization, urban planning, and even allow us to relate the proliferation of
vectorborne diseases with settlement pattern changes.
* Negative difference water index is capable of open water feature extraction or
delineationd and can tell you how turbid the lake in your backyard is provided
its visible in earth’s orbit. Further more, prediction of major flood related
disasters when embedded with machine learning systems and other statistical
approaches. This way Americans can name their hurricanes before they are born:

#### Why Satellite imagery?

Think of an industry most Sub-Saharan African inhabitants depend on:
Agriculture. Beside monitoring and predicting drought, satellite imagery can
also provide insights on the possibility of water stress in farmlands, basically
informing the need for irrigation earlier than it’d be perilous to crop
production. This emphasizes the peculiar significance of remote sensing and
satellite imagery and the promises these technologies hold for us as we pursue a
sustainably progressive future.

One other reason satellite imagery stands out as a versatile data source is its
domain independence. The use of satellite imagery spans across both industry and
academia to inform various decisions and research methodologies. Furthermore,
the insights satellite imagery is able to provide surpass many technologies
which have been invented for the same in manifold ways.

#### Reversal of Perspective

Traditional data sources aren’t obsolete or useless. They are rather well
complemented with new data sources that are capable of granting us insights we
could have never before imagined. The spectral and spatial detail of our
environment we obtain from remote sensing and satellite imagery holds tremendous
amounts of data that await to have the best insight drawn out of them. However,
size is not what matters most. It is the diversity of domain knowledge that
relates to remote sensing and satellite imagery that makes it a unique data
source.

*****

#### Collapse into dense matter!

[Join](https://goo.gl/forms/pb3NQWoU3m6GjaYA3) the Nebula Research Newsletter
for more articles on making the word a better place one technology at a time.
Click [here](https://goo.gl/forms/pb3NQWoU3m6GjaYA3) to sign up.
```
