```
# The upside to randomness?: systems using volatility to their advantage

## Wind extinguishes a candle and energizes a fire. Likewise with randomness,
uncertainty and chaos: you want to use them not hide from them - Nassim Nicholas
Taleb.

*****

Order and organization are alien to nature. As [Benoit
Mandelbrot](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Benoit_Mandelbrot) put it in the
[Fractal geometry of
Nature](https://www.amazon.com/gp/product/0910321647/ref=dbs_a_def_rwt_bibl_vppi_i2):
mountains are not cones, sand grains are not smooth surfaces and clouds are not
spheres. Natural systems and subsystems are predominantly fractal and to a large
extent messy and not linear.

This messy and fractal picture of nature (and reality) is of course by a great
artist called randomness aka chaos. The artist’s biography is explained well by
Lorentz in the chaos theory inspired writing on the butterfly effect.

However, for the sake of this article we will begin with the illustration of
chaos given by [Stephen Hawking](http://www.hawking.org.uk/) in his book called
[A Brief History of
Time](https://www.amazon.com/Brief-History-Time-Stephen-Hawking/dp/0553380168/ref=sr_1_1?keywords=a+brief+history+of+time&qid=1552832462&s=books&sr=1-1)*.
*Then we’ll see how to some systems take advantage of randomness and volatility
while others crumble to the ruthlessness of this duo.

#### Increasing universal entropy

To understand chaos or entropy, it is only wise to look at a part of the
continuum it happens within; *time.* I won’t digress to the details of time in
this essay. Regardless, one thing’s for sure, you and I likely agree that *time
moves forward *(yes, cancel that trip to 1996 and focus on this article!).* *As
Hawking Puts it:

> […] why we don’t see broken cups gathering themselves together back unto the
> table is that it is forbidden by the **second law of thermodynamics**. This says
that in **any closed system disorder, or entropy, increases with time.** In
other words, it is a form of Murphy’s law: things always tend to go wrong!

You might be tempted to assume it’s just our perception ordering events in our
minds. But this is forged in the laws of our physical universe bringing us to an
interesting realization of the all encompassing nature of chaos that is apparent
if we look at things from a broader than individual scale:

> As you read this article, entropy is all around you. Cells within your body are
> dying and degrading, an employee or coworker is making a mistake, the floor is
getting dusty, and the heat from your coffee is spreading out. Zoom out a
little, and businesses are failing, crimes and revolutions are occurring, and
relationships are ending. Zoom out a lot further and we see the entire universe
marching towards a collapse.

> - [Shane Parrish](https://medium.com/@farnamstreet) Farnam Street Blog.

#### Rivers of money and stability.

Now with the understanding that randomness increases with time, it is vital to
understand how various agents (ecological and economic) react when exposed to
different doses of randomness in their natural settings. The computer scientist
and philosopher [Kevin Simler](https://medium.com/@kevinsimler) describes human
and non human communities (e.g. the internet or a natural forest) as niches.

Hostile and unstable (volatile) niches are characterized by a diversity of
agents making the ecosystem healthy and rich and less susceptible to
annihilation from rare but harmful events. This is similar to economic systems
where volatility flushes out weak players making the collective stronger than
before. However, abundant ecosystems with stability are likely to be
characterized by low gene diversity and hence dominated by a few specialized
species (*80/20 rule style*). This makes the ecosystem vulnerable should a
catastrophic and unpredictable event occur.

To easily understand the relationship between volatility and the ecosystem the
metaphor of rivers of money as cash flows suggested by the author [Venkatesh
Rao](https://www.ribbonfarm.com/author/admin/) serves as a great resource. He
points out that when the cash flow is stable in a particular system the agents
therein tend to go complacent making them vulnerable to black swan events:

> Organizations are like riverbank communities. The **stability of the river, not
> the attitudes of people,** is what makes old organizations seem set in their
ways. Perhaps people resist new ideas not because they have specific
personalities, but because they have settled on the banks of a river of money of
a certain age. Tax rivers are among the oldest and most stable rivers of money
(and the only ones protected by the threat of legitimate force), and people
attracted to government work aren’t exactly known for being passionate champions
of creative destruction.

> - [Venkatesh Rao](https://medium.com/@vgr) Ribbon farm

As we can see, volatility is essential in ecosystems as it is significant in
economies. Startups and business face hostile randomness-filled environments as
they are not stabilized by stable funding from taxes and other sources of
government revenue. This eliminates the weak entrepreneurs making the remaining
players cautious of actions that led to the financial demise of their
counterparts. In a nutshell, volatility allows for stressors that are
informational to the remaining agents after eliminating the complacent ones in
rare events.

#### How to benefit from volatility

1.  *Reduce opacity (shades on)*

With chaos as an inevitable reality, it is dangerous to assume a mastery of the
universe. However, one can employ the use of models to reduce the opacity that
comes with randomness. Think of it as wearing glasses that clear out the clutter
of chaotic things, or as maps to navigate the seas of randomness. It is however
essential to use the right map in the right sea. In most of my endeavors as a
data scientist in an ecological modeling domain, I am personally inclined to use
[fuzzy inference systems](https://link.medium.com/GfgMSgUseS) to make sense of
complex, uncertain and imprecise datasets. It is generally relevant to make use
of [mental models](https://fs.blog/mental-models/) as they act as
[blinkers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blinkers_(horse_tack))* *that enable
race horses to focus on the track than a wide field of view.

<span class="figcaption_hack">[source](https://xkcd.com/162/)</span>

2*. Bottom up tribal systems than the reverse*

The conventional top down approach in social systems deprives them of the
volatility they very much need. To accentuate this point, think of hunter
gatherer communities who had a horizontal structure than a vertical one. In the
former case, the members of the community are empowered to gossip and connive or
plot against their leaders whose stay as leaders is based on merit like hunting
skills or the leader’s capacity to put the interests of the community ahead of
his. The later on the other hand is characterized by a hierarchy with an
*untouchable* human at the top.

However, unlike the tribal counterparts, these conventional top down setups are
more often than never led by a human lacking skin in the game (doesn’t put their
neck out at all). The point here is, volatile environments lead to more
decentralized social systems yet those denied of volatile environments likely
result into a more hierarchical and unnecessarily bureaucratic leadership. It is
no wonder that the most successful revolutions were influenced by well
coordinated small, flexible and volatility-friendly structure of guerrilla
warfare and the fragility of complacent governments numbed by their stability
and hold of the masses.

> Revolutions are usually made by small networks of agitators rather than by the
> masses. If you want to launch a revolution, don’t ask yourself, ‘How many people
support my ideas?’ Instead, ask yourself, ‘How many of my supporters are capable
of effective collaboration?’ The Russian Revolution finally erupted not when 180
million peasants rose against the tsar, but rather when a handful of communists
placed themselves at the right place at the right time. In 1917, at a time when
the Russian upper and middle classes numbered at least 3 million people, the
Communist Party had just 23,000 members. The communists nevertheless gained
control of the vast Russian Empire because they organised themselves well.

> -[Yuval Noah Harari](https://medium.com/@harari_yuval), [Homo
> Deus](https://www.amazon.com/s?k=homo+deus&i=stripbooks-intl-ship&ref=nb_sb_noss_2):
[A Brief History of
Tomorrow](https://www.amazon.com/Homo-Deus-Brief-History-Tomorrow/dp/0062464345/ref=sr_1_1?keywords=homo+deus&qid=1552833877&s=books&sr=1-1)

<span class="figcaption_hack">[source](https://www.smbc-comics.com/comic/2014-01-23)</span>

3*. Reboot but keep a backup*

Organisms have natural way of refreshing their gene pool: dying after letting
their genes (coded information) into payloads called offspring. This process is
necessary for reducing internal entropy or chaos accumulated by the individuals.
A similar process can be observed in computers which accumulate chaos overtime.
This can be in the form of bloatware and cache files that slow down your system.
So rebooting or clearing these many files refreshes the system as a whole by
loosing a subset of the chaotic clutter. Now for my favorite part part:

#### Why be the fire?

1.  *Adaptation and resilience are post facto.*

Most academic papers and global institutions/frameworks/policies advocate for
resilience or adaptation. The fact that these advocated concepts are only
possible after an unpredictable harm is already done makes them less useful
compared to systems that feed off of the same rare event to get better than
return to an initial state. Further, it is okay to return to an initial state
after a catastrophe, but this makes sense in closed systems without incremental
chaos. The downside to this lies in the fact that it is not how natural systems
work. Little harm to natural systems make them better off than making them
return to their pre-stressed state. I mean, think about it there would no weight
lifters if human muscles returned to their initial size and strength than
improving from the little harm of microtears.

2. *The beauty of mortality lies here*.

Life is the roommate of death, says Lawrence. If you think about it, most of
humanity’s achievements have been directly or indirectly motivated around the
presumably polar concepts of life and death

* Religions all across the world emphasize *life* after *death* or some paradise
if their life before death was lived according to some accepted standards.
* Humanity as a species is constantly innovating in medicine and related fields to
increase life expectancy, another word for death delaying for most of its
population.
* The death of a subset of people has always lead to information evading the
reasons that caused them in the first place. Basically if we were immortal as a
species I bet we would never have understood our gastric systems or even the
most basic anatomy. I am basically implying *death* has made a lot of life
saving science discoveries possible.

3. *Amor fati*

The love for volatility engages one to basically enjoy the events that randomly
come to them. Think for instance, if you had to predict the day you met the love
of your life, I don’t think it would be as excited about it than if you had
bumped into them. This love for volatility eases the process of loving one’s
fate (amor fati) as the stoic Emperor Marcus Aurelius put it:

> Remember: Matter. How tiny your share of it Time. How brief and fleeting your
> allotment of it Fate. How small a role you play in it

### Join the chaotic stellar movement

[Join the Nebula Research
Newsletter](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1ffnqOv80Ty8nQEr7t9iwOv94hgIhrxGODMZXnYndi_s/edit)
to get these essays straight in your mailbox.

```